## 01/06/2026 and 04/06/2026 - [ORDERS] Associate customer with orders
### Goal
Link orders to authenticated customers while preserving historical order ownership and enabling future analytics, tracking, and customer-related features.

OBSERVATION: This task was planned considering A LOT of features. there was just so many things that I have not done yet and it was skipping the creation of the order API and its endpoints. I marked it with done and created other cards with more detailed tasks.

So, the main goal of the both days was really about deciding how I should implement the Cart system - that was difficult for itself. Don't forget to check the Key Decisions section.

### Implemented
- Changed my cart javascript file for better user experience.
```javascript
const STORAGE_KEY = "chewie_cart";

let cart = JSON.parse(
    localStorage.getItem(STORAGE_KEY)
) || [];

function saveCart(){ // this function keeps the user from resetting their cart every time they close the browser
    localStorage.setItem(
        STORAGE_KEY,
        JSON.stringify(cart)
    );
}
```

- The whole script.js file is mostly the same, but now I can generate an payload to the backend
```javascript
function buildOrderPayload() {
    return {
        items: cart.map(item => ({
            menu_item_id: item.id,
            quantity: item.quantity
        }))
    };
}
```
 
- Now the menu items are referred to their respective IDs, instead of by their names
```javascript
function renderMenu(data){ // obs.: i reduced the function just to keep the devlog from being to extense
    itemDiv.innerHTML = `
        <button 
            class="botao-carrinho"
            data-item-id="${item.id}" // <-- new line
            ${!item.is_available ? "disabled" : ""}
            onclick="addToCart(${item.id}, '${item.name}', ${item.price})"
        >
            ${item.is_available ? "Adicionar ao carrinho" : "Indisponível"}
        </button>
    `;
};
```
 
### Key Decisions
- **Changes on the directory organization inside of Static**
I realized that I will be building more javascript logic and the JS file was begining to look crowded. Before, the whole static folder were being organized by the project apps, but I decided to keep all css and img files generic and, inside the js folder, I decided to organize by apps.

- **Should I use is_autenticated() on the confirm_order method or on the view?**
The view. If I put the is_authenticated function inside of confirm_order, the transition method would be doing more than it should. For business rules as minimum price limit, its okay, but authentication is responsibility of the views.py file.

- **How should I build the cart logic?**
This one could easily be inside of the next section of Challenges, but since I came to a conclusion, its inside the Key Decisions section here.

The first thing that I thought of doing, was creating a Cart model right after creating the Order one. But, I also considered building the Cart inside of Order. That's because the Order model has its statuses and I could use the PENDING status as a Cart.

Eventually, I went beyond: I really want to avoid bad user experience. So, what I wanted was to keep the Cart intact after the user closed the browser's tab, even if they are anonymus. If they had 1 item in the cart, this one item should still be on the cart after they logged in again. 

So, I could not use the PENDING Order status as Cart because the Order model needs a user related to it. Okay, minus one at least.

At this point, I was left with: Build a Cart Model or just Reuse and Adapt the Javascript file that I already had for the Cart since the begining (As I said on a previous devlog, this project is the evolution of a simpler project that I made in August 2025. You can check it out here: [GitHub](https://github.com/luccatrevisan/chewie-cookies-menu/)).

I opted for the JS file for simplicity. It was mostly done and the Cart model would be unnecessary trouble. The cart would be responsibility for the frontend and it would send the payload to the backend on the POST method in the order endpoint.

### Challenges
1. **This one item from the task checklist kept me going crazy:**
On the Kanban board, the task of the day (same name as the name of this devlog) had this item: "Ensure user relationship works with authenticated requests". The thing is: To check this item as DONE, I should build A LOT of features, like the order serializer, the order endpoint, the javascript logic to connect the frontend to the endpoint and, then, build the order views.py logic, considering the required authentication. 

The main cause of this was ChatGPT. Since it doesnt have all the context, I believe it considered that I already made the API and the endpoint, and skipped to the required authentication feature. I really like to use AI to organize my tasks since I dont have a senior guiding me, so this is a point to consider the next time I start planning my tasks.

### References
- https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/6.0/ref/contrib/auth/#django.contrib.auth.models.User.is_authenticated
- https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/6.0/ref/request-response/

### Next steps
- [ ] Create the order serializer
- [ ] Create the order endpoint

---